.TH "FAPOLICYD.TIMING" "5" "May 2026" "Red Hat" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
fapolicyd.timing \- fapolicyd manual decision timing report
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.timing
file contains one manual decision timing run from
.BR fapolicyd (8).
The daemon writes this file when a privileged manual timing stop request ends
an armed timing run. A stop request while timing is not armed writes a short
status report instead of timing data. The daemon may also stop collection and
write the report when a timing counter would overflow.
.PP
Timing collection is disabled by default. Manual timing requests are honored
only when the active daemon configuration has
.B timing_collection=manual
in
.BR fapolicyd.conf (5).
The command
.B fapolicyd-cli --timing-start
arms a run, and
.B fapolicyd-cli --timing-stop
stops the run and prints this report.
.PP
The daemon stores aggregate counters only. It does not store one timing record
per decision. Each decision worker owns local aggregate blocks containing a
call count, total time, maximum time, and fixed latency buckets for each stage.
The report snapshots and aggregates those blocks.
.SH RUN SUMMARY
The first lines summarize the run:
.TP
.B Mode
Active timing collection mode.
.TP
.B Timing run
Wall-clock start and stop time.
.TP
.B Duration
Elapsed wall-clock run time in
.B H:MM:SS
format.
.TP
.B Workers
Number of decision worker timing blocks included in the snapshot.
.TP
.B Max queue depth
Highest internal event queue depth observed during the timing run. The daemon
temporarily resets only the max queue depth counter when timing starts and
restores the previous high-water mark after timing stops if the previous value
was larger. The
.B Queueing
section repeats this value next to queue wait timing.
.TP
.B Decisions
Number of completed fanotify decisions timed during the run.
.TP
.B Throughput
Timed decisions per second over the wall-clock run duration. This includes
time when fapolicyd was armed but no events were waiting to be decided.
.TP
.B Active decision rate
Timed decisions per second using the sum of
.B decision:total
latency instead of wall-clock duration. With more than one decision worker,
this is worker-time, not elapsed wall-clock time.
.TP
.B Stop reason
Printed only when the run stopped automatically because a timing counter would
overflow.
.SH OVERALL DECISION LATENCY
The
.B Overall decision latency
section describes end-to-end decision latency from the point a decision worker
starts processing a dequeued fanotify event until the decision path returns
after response handling.
.PP
The section prints average and maximum latency using compact latency units,
approximate
percentile buckets, and cumulative percentages for useful thresholds such as
.B <=50us ,
.B <=100us ,
.B <=500us ,
.B <=1ms ,
and
.B >10ms .
Percentiles are bucket approximations, not exact per-decision percentiles.
The 95th percentile is a useful tail-latency marker: roughly 95% of observed
calls were at or below that bucket, so a high p95 points to a recurring slow
path rather than a single worst-case outlier.
.PP
When high-end tail buckets are observed, the section also prints a compact
.B tail
line for
.B >10ms ,
.B >25ms ,
.B >50ms ,
.B >100ms ,
and
.B >250ms .
The line includes both count and percentage so long outliers do not disappear
inside a single
.B >10ms
bucket.
.SH QUEUEING
The
.B Queueing
section describes work waiting before a decision worker starts processing an
event. It is based on
.B time_in_queue:total
when enqueue timestamps were observed during the timing run.
.TP
.B avg wait
Average observed time in the internal userspace event queue.
.TP
.B max wait
Longest observed wait in the internal userspace event queue.
.TP
.B p95 bucket
Approximate bucket containing the 95th percentile queue wait.
.TP
.B total queued time
Sum of observed queue wait time. This is useful for spotting producer/consumer
imbalance, but it is not decision CPU time.
.TP
.B max queue depth
Highest internal event queue depth observed during the timing run.
.PP
If no enqueue timestamps were observed, the section prints
.B not observed
and still reports max queue depth.
.SH DECISION PHASE TIMING
The
.B Decision phase timing
section shows the main decision-thread phases when they were observed:
.PP
.RS
.nf
event_build:total
evaluation:total
response:total
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Phase
Displayed phase name.
.TP
.B Calls
Number of times the phase was measured.
.TP
.B Calls/Dec
Average phase calls per timed decision.
.TP
.B Total
Total measured phase time.
.TP
.B Avg
Average phase call time.
.TP
.B Max
Slowest observed phase call.
.TP
.B p95 bucket
Approximate bucket containing the 95th percentile phase call.
.TP
.B Notes
Short deterministic notes. For example, a response phase dominated by syslog
or debug formatting is marked
.B syslog/debug-heavy .
.PP
These phase rows are the best first view for explaining where decision-thread
time is being spent. Helper rows are separate because some lazy helper
operations can be requested from more than one phase.
.SH LAZY HELPER ATTRIBUTION
The report introduces helper attribution with:
.PP
.RS
.nf
Lazy helper attribution:
  Helper timings are attributed to the active logical driver:
  evaluation or response.
  Combined totals are evaluation + response.
.fi
.RE
.PP
The driver table and combined helper table follow this note.
.SH LAZY HELPER ATTRIBUTION BY DRIVER
The
.B Lazy helper attribution by driver
section shows helper time split by the logical context that caused it:
evaluation or response.
.TP
.B Helper
Short helper path.
.TP
.B Eval total
Total helper time caused while the rule evaluation driver was active.
.TP
.B Response total
Total helper time caused while response, audit metadata, or syslog/debug
formatting was active.
.TP
.B Combined
Total helper time from all driver contexts.
.TP
.B Response %
Percentage of combined helper time caused by response-side work. This is useful
for deciding whether manual/debug reporting is driving MIME or trust lookup
cost.
.SH COMBINED LAZY HELPER ATTRIBUTION
The
.B Combined lazy helper attribution
section groups helper-related stages into stable combined paths. For helpers
that are split by driver, the combined row is calculated by adding the
phase-specific evaluation and response rows together. These rows answer how
often a helper was needed and how expensive that helper was when amortized over
all decisions.
.TP
.B Helper path
Short combined helper path.
.TP
.B Calls
Number of helper calls measured.
.TP
.B Calls/Dec
Average helper calls per timed decision.
.TP
.B Total
Total measured helper time.
.TP
.B Avg/call
Average measured helper call time.
.TP
.B Amort/Dec
Total helper time divided by all timed decisions. This shows how much a lazy or
rare helper contributes to a typical decision in the measured workload.
.TP
.B Max
Slowest observed helper call.
.TP
.B p95 bucket
Approximate bucket containing the 95th percentile helper call.
.PP
The current helper groups are:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mime_detection:total
mime_detection:fast_classification
mime_detection:gather_elf
mime_detection:libmagic_fallback
trust_db_lookup:total
trust_db_lookup:read
trust_db_lookup:lock_wait
hash_ima:total
hash_sha:total
proc_detail_lookup
.fi
.RE
.SH DERIVED OBSERVATIONS
The
.B Derived observations
section prints short deterministic observations when the required data was
present in the run. Examples include:
.IP \(bu 2
Wall-clock throughput compared with active decision rate, which can show that
the workload was mostly idle while timing was armed.
.IP \(bu 2
Queue wait and maximum queue depth compared with
.B q_size
when queue timing and configuration data are available.
.IP \(bu 2
Response formatting share when syslog/debug formatting dominates
.B response:total .
.IP \(bu 2
MIME helper cost and libmagic fallback share.
.IP \(bu 2
Rare but expensive integrity work from
.B hash_ima
or
.B hash_sha ,
reported as percent of decisions, average time when called, and amortized
decision cost.
.IP \(bu 2
Trust database lock wait compared with trust database read time.
.SH STAGE TAIL SUMMARY
When hot detailed stage rows have observations above 10ms, the report prints a
.B Stage tail summary
after the detailed table. Rows are sorted by
.B >10ms
count, limited to the top five rows, and extended with any additional row that
has a nonzero
.B >50ms
count. Near-identical parent/child tail rows may be suppressed to keep the
section focused.
.PP
.RS
.nf
stage:name: >10ms count/percent, >25ms count/percent, >50ms count/percent
.fi
.RE
.PP
The detailed table remains the canonical total-time ranking; the tail summary
only adds high-end resolution for rows that crossed one of the tail thresholds.
Thresholds with zero observations are omitted.
.SH DETAILED STAGE TABLE
The
.B Detailed stage timing
table is sorted by total measured time by default. It answers which measured
operations consumed the most total time during the run. This is the detailed
view and is intentionally kept below the summary and helper attribution
sections.
.PP
The
.B decision:total
row is included when observed and participates in the same total-time sort as
the other rows.
.TP
.B Stage
Measured operation name. The current stage set is listed in
.BR "DECISION FLOW" .
.TP
.B Calls
Number of times the operation was measured.
.TP
.B Calls/Dec
Average measured calls per timed decision.
.TP
.B Total
Total measured time for the stage.
.TP
.B Avg
Average measured call time for the stage.
.TP
.B Max
Slowest observed call for the stage.
.TP
.B p95 bucket
Approximate bucket containing the 95th percentile call for the stage.
.PP
Stages with zero calls are hidden from the table and listed under
.B Not observed .
If a stage is not observed, no measured call to that operation occurred during
the timing window. For example, an absent
.B evaluation:trust_db_lookup:total
and
.B response:trust_db_lookup:total
line means no measured trust database lookup occurred from those drivers in
that run.
.SH DECISION FLOW
Stage names use a colon-separated hierarchy:
.PP
.RS
.nf
phase:operation:child
.fi
.RE
.PP
Rows ending in
.B :total
are parent scopes. Child operation timings are useful contributors, but they
can be nested, lazy, or shared by more than one code path, so child rows are
not expected to add up to the parent total.
.PP
The main decision-thread view is:
.PP
.RS
.nf
decision:total
time_in_queue:total
event_build:total
event_build:cache_flush
event_build:proc_fingerprint
event_build:fd_stat

evaluation:lock_wait
evaluation:total
evaluation:mime_detection:total
evaluation:mime_detection:fast_classification
evaluation:mime_detection:gather_elf
evaluation:mime_detection:libmagic_fallback
evaluation:fd_path_resolution
evaluation:proc_detail_lookup
evaluation:hash_ima:total
evaluation:hash_sha:total
evaluation:trust_db_lookup:total
evaluation:trust_db_lookup:lock_wait
evaluation:trust_db_lookup:read

response:total
response:syslog_debug_format:total
response:mime_detection:total
response:mime_detection:fast_classification
response:mime_detection:gather_elf
response:mime_detection:libmagic_fallback
response:trust_db_lookup:total
response:trust_db_lookup:lock_wait
response:trust_db_lookup:read
response:audit_metadata:total
response:fanotify_write
.fi
.RE
.PP
Lazy helper operations are attributed to the active logical driver when the
helper is called. Rule evaluation uses
.B evaluation: ,
response logging and audit response work use
.B response: .
Helper timing outside those logical drivers is treated as an instrumentation
bug and is not reported as a separate phase.
.SH STAGES
.TP
.B decision:total
Decision worker latency after a fanotify event has been dequeued, including
event build, policy evaluation, optional logging or audit preparation, and
response handling. Queue wait time is reported separately.
.TP
.B time_in_queue:total
Time a fanotify event spent in the internal userspace queue between enqueue by
the fanotify reader thread and dequeue by a decision worker. Events already in
the queue when timing is armed do not have an enqueue timestamp and are not
included in this stage.
.TP
.B event_build:total
Construction of the internal event from fanotify metadata. This includes
subject and object cache lookups, initial subject and object fingerprints, and
some pattern-state work.
.TP
.B event_build:cache_flush
Object cache flush performed on the decision path when the global flush flag
is set.
.TP
.B event_build:proc_fingerprint
Initial
.I /proc/<pid>
stat used to identify the subject process and detect stale subject cache
entries.
.TP
.B event_build:fd_stat
Stat of the fanotify file descriptor used to fingerprint the object.
.TP
.B evaluation:lock_wait
Time spent waiting for the rule lock before policy evaluation.
.TP
.B evaluation:total
Rule list evaluation loop. Lazy subject, object, trust, hash, or type lookups
caused by rule fields can appear as child operation timings and also contribute
to this total.
.TP
.B evaluation:proc_detail_lookup
On-demand subject procfs detail lookups, including
.I /proc/<pid>/status ,
.I /proc/<pid>/exe ,
subject executable type, session id, and auid lookups. These can be driven
lazily by rules, syslog/debug formatting, or audit metadata.
.TP
.B evaluation:fd_path_resolution
Path resolution for the object file descriptor.
.PP
For MIME and trust DB helper rows below,
.B *
means the driver prefix
.B evaluation ,
.B response .
.TP
.B *:mime_detection:total
Object type and ELF/script detection.
.TP
.B *:mime_detection:fast_classification
In-house classification before libmagic fallback. This includes empty-file,
ELF/script, shebang, common magic number, common text format, and device checks.
.TP
.B *:mime_detection:gather_elf
ELF/script header scan performed by
.BR gather_elf ().
.TP
.B *:mime_detection:libmagic_fallback
Full libmagic fallback used when the faster type checks cannot classify the
object.
.TP
.B evaluation:hash_ima:total
IMA digest collection from the
.I security.ima
xattr through
.BR get_ima_hash ().
.TP
.B evaluation:hash_sha:total
SHA-style file digest collection through
.BR get_hash_from_fd2 ().
.TP
.B *:trust_db_lookup:total
Total trust database lookup through
.BR check_trust_database ().
This includes update-thread lock wait, long-term LMDB read setup, the primary
LMDB lookup, optional hash work requested by trust lookup, and the top-level
.I /usr
symlink retry path.
.TP
.B *:trust_db_lookup:lock_wait
Time spent waiting for the trust database update-thread lock before LMDB read
setup. This is a future multi-decision-thread contention signal.
.TP
.B *:trust_db_lookup:read
LMDB read setup and trust database read work after the update-thread lock is
held. This currently includes the primary lookup, optional hash work requested
by trust lookup, the top-level
.I /usr
symlink retry path, and read cleanup.
.TP
.B response:total
Work after the rule loop has completed. This includes syslog/debug formatting,
rule/source bookkeeping, decision metric updates, response selection, audit
metadata preparation, fanotify response writes, and descriptor close work.
.TP
.B response:syslog_debug_format:total
Formatting of syslog or debug output after a decision. Lazy field lookups
needed only for logging may appear as nested stage timings.
.TP
.B response:audit_metadata:total
Preparation of fanotify audit response metadata before the response write.
When audit metadata needs object trust, trust lookup time can be nested here.
.TP
.B response:fanotify_write
The actual
.BR write (2)
of the fanotify response to the kernel.
.SH NOTES
The notes footer reports the largest queued-time contributor when queue wait
was observed, the largest helper contributor, the largest decision phase
contributor, and the slowest observed row by maximum time.
.PP
For cache hit, miss, collision, eviction, subject deferral, and early subject
eviction counters, see
.BR fapolicyd.state (5).
.PP
If adding a timing count, total, or bucket counter would overflow, fapolicyd
disarms timing, records an overflow stop reason, and writes the timing report
instead of allowing counters to wrap and skew the data.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.timing
Manual decision timing report.
.TP
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.state
Runtime state report containing timing control state and cache counters.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fapolicyd (8),
.BR fapolicyd-cli (8),
.BR fapolicyd.conf (5),
.BR fapolicyd.state (5),
and
.BR fapolicyd.trust (5).
