.TH "FAPOLICYD.METRICS" "5" "May 2026" "Red Hat" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
fapolicyd.metrics \- fapolicyd runtime metrics report file
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.metrics
file contains the most recent daemon metrics report requested through
.BR fapolicyd-cli\ --check-metrics ,
.BR fapolicyd-cli\ --reset-metrics ,
or periodic interval reporting.
.PP
The metrics report answers where runtime hot paths and cache effects are. The
state report, written to
.IR /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.state ,
answers whether the daemon is healthy and configured as expected.
Each field is printed as a
.I name: value
line. Section headers end in a colon.
.SH HEADER
.TP
.B Last metrics reset
The wall-clock time of the last successful metrics reset, or
.B never
when metrics have not been reset since daemon start. Reset reports show the
counter window that is about to be reset; later metrics reports show the new
reset time.
.TP
.B Config generation
The active decision configuration generation at report time. The counters may
span earlier generations when configuration was reloaded after the last metrics
reset.
.TP
.B Ruleset generation
The active ruleset generation that the counters and rule hit table apply to.
.TP
.B Trust database generation
The active trust database generation used by new decision reads at report time.
This is a daemon-runtime generation that starts at 1 during startup. The
counters may span earlier trust database generations when reloads occurred
after the last metrics reset.
.TP
.B LMDB environment generation
The active physical LMDB environment generation at report time. This increments
only when fapolicyd closes the live environment and publishes a validated
replacement environment for compaction or high-water reset. It complements the
trust database generation: trust generations publish logical content inside an
environment, while LMDB environment generations identify the storage file
currently backing those logical generations.
.TP
.B Trust database entries
The number of records in the active trust database generation at report time.
.SH Decision outcomes
.TP
.B Allowed accesses
The number of policy decisions that allowed access.
.TP
.B Denied accesses
The number of policy decisions that denied access.
.TP
.B Allowed by rule
The number of allow decisions produced by a matching rule.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough
The number of allow decisions produced when no rule had an opinion and the
daemon used the default allow behavior. Detailed fallthrough dimensions are
printed when this value is non-zero.
.SH Inter-thread queue & defer activity
.TP
.B Inter-thread current queue depth
The number of fanotify permission events currently waiting in internal worker
queues.
.TP
.B Inter-thread max queue depth
The highest per-worker internal event queue depth observed since the last
metrics reset.
.TP
.B Decision worker N current queue depth
The number of fanotify permission events currently waiting in that worker's
queue.
.TP
.B Decision worker N max queue depth
The highest queue depth observed for that worker since the last metrics reset.
.TP
.B Decision worker N queue full count
The number of failed enqueue attempts for that worker since the last metrics
reset.
.TP
.B Decision worker N oldest queued age
The age of the oldest event currently waiting in that worker's queue.
The value is formatted with a human-readable unit such as
.B ms
or
.BR s .
.TP
.B Subject deferred events
The cumulative number of fanotify permission events deferred since the last
metrics reset because another process was still building subject pattern state
in the same cache slot.
.TP
.B Subject defer max depth
The highest number of concurrently deferred subject events observed since the
last metrics reset.
.TP
.B Subject defer fallbacks
The cumulative number of defer-array-full fallbacks since the last metrics
reset. This field also appears in the state report because non-zero values are
health indicators.
.SH Subject cache effectiveness
.TP
.B Subject hits
The number of subject cache hits.
.TP
.B Subject misses
The number of subject cache misses.
.TP
.B Subject collisions
The number of populated subject cache slots whose full process identity did
not match the current event and therefore had to be evicted before reuse.
.TP
.B Subject evictions
The number of subject cache evictions and the eviction percentage relative to
subject cache hits.
.TP
.B Early subject cache evictions
The number of subject cache entries evicted before process startup state was
complete. This field also appears in the state report because non-zero values
are health indicators.
.TP
.B Subject BUILDING tracer evictions
The number of BUILDING subject cache entries evicted because the owning process
was traced and could hold the slot indefinitely. This field also appears in
the state report because non-zero values are health indicators.
.TP
.B Subject BUILDING stale evictions
The number of BUILDING subject cache entries evicted because their startup
state stayed incomplete past the bounded stale window. This field also appears
in the state report because non-zero values are health indicators.
.SH Object cache effectiveness
.TP
.B Object hits
The number of object cache hits.
.TP
.B Object misses
The number of object cache misses.
.TP
.B Object collisions
The number of populated object cache slots whose full file identity did not
match the current event and therefore had to be evicted before reuse.
.TP
.B Object evictions
The number of object cache evictions and the eviction percentage relative to
object cache hits.
.SH Trust database lookups
.TP
.B Trust DB lookups
The number of trust database lookup attempts since the last metrics reset.
.TP
.B Trust DB reader slots full
The number of lookup attempts that could not open an LMDB read transaction
because all LMDB reader slots were in use.
.PP
Trust database lookup latency is reported by
.BR fapolicyd.timing (5)
only while manual timing collection is armed, so normal metrics collection does
not add per-lookup clock reads.
.SH Rule hit counts
.TP
.B Hits/rule
One line per configured rule in rule order. The line includes the one-based
rule number, hit count, and rule text. Rule hit counters are naturally scoped
to the active ruleset generation and start at zero when a new ruleset is
loaded. A metrics reset also clears the counters after reporting them, which
allows focused tests against the currently loaded rules without forcing a rule
reload.
.SH Subject attribute lookups
.TP
.B Subject attr
One line is printed for each counted subject attribute in the form
.IR name " requests=" count " lookups=" count .
The
.B requests
count increments when policy evaluation or syslog formatting asks for the
attribute. The
.B lookups
count increments only when that attribute was absent from the event subject
cache and fapolicyd had to compute or fetch it.
.SH Object attribute lookups
.TP
.B Object attr
One line is printed for each counted object attribute in the form
.IR name " requests=" count " lookups=" count .
The
.B requests
count increments when policy evaluation or syslog formatting asks for the
attribute. The
.B lookups
count increments only when that attribute was absent from the event object
cache and fapolicyd had to compute or fetch it.
.SH NOTES
Metrics resets affect counters in this report. Static configuration, current
utilization snapshots, watched mounts, and health indicators are reported in
.BR fapolicyd.state (5)
and are not reset by
.BR fapolicyd-cli\ --reset-metrics .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.metrics
Runtime metrics report file.
.TP
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.state
Runtime state report file.
.TP
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.timing
Manual decision timing report written when a privileged stop request ends an
armed timing run, when a stop request finds timing unarmed, or when timing
collection stops to avoid counter overflow.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fapolicyd (8),
.BR fapolicyd-cli (8),
.BR fapolicyd.conf (5),
.BR fapolicyd.rules (5),
.BR fapolicyd.state (5),
.BR fapolicyd.timing (5),
and
.BR fapolicyd.trust (5).
