.TH "FAPOLICYD.STATE" "5" "April 2026" "Red Hat" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
fapolicyd.state \- fapolicyd runtime state report
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.state
file contains a point-in-time runtime state report from
.BR fapolicyd (8).
The daemon writes this file when it receives
.B SIGUSR1
or when periodic reporting is enabled with
.B report_interval
in
.BR fapolicyd.conf (5).
Depending on the
.B reset_strategy
configuration and report trigger, generating this report can also reset runtime
metric counters after the report snapshot is written.
.PP
The report is intended for human inspection and operational troubleshooting.
Each metric is printed as a
.I name: value
line. The fields below are listed in the order they appear in the report.
.SH TOP-LEVEL FIELDS
.TP
.B Permissive
Whether the daemon is running in permissive mode. In permissive mode, policy
denials are reported as denied decisions, but the response sent to the kernel
allows access.
.TP
.B Integrity
The configured file integrity mode used for trust checks.
.TP
.B reset_strategy
The active metrics reset strategy. A value of
.B never
keeps metrics growing for the daemon lifetime,
.B auto
resets timer-generated reports, and
.B manual
resets signal-generated reports if the signal carries reset intent (only possible programmatically).
.TP
.B CPU cores
The number of online processor cores reported by the system.
.TP
.B q_size
The configured size of the internal event queue.
.TP
.B Inter-thread max queue depth
The highest internal event queue depth observed since daemon startup.

.SH DECISION AND RELIABILITY COUNTERS
.TP
.B Kernel Queue Overflow
The number of
.B FAN_Q_OVERFLOW
events reported by the kernel. A non-zero value means kernel fanotify events
were lost before the daemon could process them.
.TP
.B Reply Errors
The number of failed or short writes when sending fanotify permission
responses back to the kernel.
.TP
.B Allowed accesses
The number of policy decisions that allowed access. This includes both
rule-based allows and no-opinion fallthrough allows.
.TP
.B Denied accesses
The number of policy decisions that denied access. In permissive mode these
decisions are still counted as denials even though the daemon permits the
kernel access.
.TP
.B Allowed by rule
The number of allow decisions produced by a matching rule.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough
The number of allow decisions produced when no rule had an opinion and the
daemon used the default allow behavior. When this value is zero, the detailed
fallthrough fields below are omitted from the report.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough open
The number of fallthrough allows for file open permission events.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough execute
The number of fallthrough allows for file execute permission events.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough trusted
The number of fallthrough allows where the object was known to be trusted.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough untrusted
The number of fallthrough allows where the object was known to be untrusted.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough trust unknown
The number of fallthrough allows where object trust could not be determined
or was not present in the event attributes.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough executable
The number of fallthrough allows whose object type was classified as
executable content, including bad ELF content.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough programmatic
The number of fallthrough allows whose object type was classified as content
commonly consumed by interpreters, such as language source, bytecode, scripts,
or Java archives.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough sharedlib
The number of fallthrough allows whose object type was classified as a shared
library.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough unknown ftype
The number of fallthrough allows where the object file type was missing or
unknown.
.TP
.B Allowed by fallthrough other ftype
The number of fallthrough allows whose object file type did not fit the
executable, programmatic, shared library, or unknown buckets.
.TP
.B Ruleset generation
The current in-memory ruleset generation. This value increments each time a
fully validated ruleset is published by the daemon.

.SH FAILURE ACTION COUNTERS
Failure action counters record reliability failures that may need stricter
configured behavior in high-security deployments. In this version every
failure action is
.BR observe ,
meaning the daemon records and reports the failure while preserving existing
compatibility behavior.

.TP
.B Failure action queue_full (observe)
Number of times the internal userspace event queue was full. Current behavior
is unchanged: enforcing mode denies the event, while permissive mode allows it.
.TP
.B Failure action kernel_queue_overflow (observe)
Number of kernel fanotify queue overflow events. This indicates lost kernel
visibility and should be treated as a high-severity operational signal.
.TP
.B Failure action worker_stall (observe)
Number of decision worker stall detections. Current behavior remains the
existing deadman response.
.TP
.B Failure action rule_reload_failure (observe)
Number of rule reload failures. A failed transactional reload preserves the
previous published policy when one exists.
.TP
.B Failure action trust_reload_failure (observe)
Number of trust database reload failures.
.TP
.B Failure action response_write_failure (observe)
Number of failed or incomplete fanotify response writes to the kernel.

.SH TRUST DATABASE FIELDS
.TP
.B Trust database max pages
The configured maximum LMDB page count for the trust database.
.TP
.B Trust database pages in use
The number and percentage of LMDB pages currently used by the trust database.

.SH MEMORY FIELDS
When fapolicyd is built on a system that provides
.BR mallinfo2 (3),
the report includes glibc allocator fields showing current and previous values.
.TP
.B glibc arena (total memory) is
The current total glibc heap arena size in KiB, followed by the value from
the previous report. This field is printed only when the daemon is built with
glibc
.BR mallinfo2 (3)
support.
.TP
.B glibc uordblks (in use memory) is
The current allocated heap memory in KiB, followed by the value from the
previous report. This field is printed only when the daemon is built with
glibc
.BR mallinfo2 (3)
support.
.TP
.B glibc fordblks (total free space) is
The current free heap memory in KiB, followed by the value from the previous
report. This field is printed only when the daemon is built with glibc
.BR mallinfo2 (3)
support.

.SH CACHE AND MOUNT FIELDS
Interval state reports include aggregate subject and object cache statistics.
.TP
.B Subject cache size
The configured number of entries in the subject cache.
.TP
.B Subject slots in use
The number and percentage of subject cache slots currently occupied.
.TP
.B Subject hits
The number of subject cache hits.
.TP
.B Subject misses
The number of subject cache misses.
.TP
.B Subject evictions
The number of subject cache evictions and the eviction percentage relative
to subject cache hits.
.TP
.B Early subject cache evictions
The number of subject cache entries evicted before process startup state was
complete.
.TP
.B Object cache size
The configured number of entries in the object cache.
.TP
.B Object slots in use
The number and percentage of object cache slots currently occupied.
.TP
.B Object hits
The number of object cache hits.
.TP
.B Object misses
The number of object cache misses.
.TP
.B Object evictions
The number of object cache evictions and the eviction percentage relative to
object cache hits.
.TP
.B watching mount
One line is printed for each mount point currently marked for fanotify
monitoring.

.SH NOTES
Some detailed fallthrough fields are printed only after at least one
fallthrough allow has occurred. Memory fields depend on build-time platform
support for
.BR mallinfo2 (3).

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.state
Runtime state report.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fapolicyd (8),
.BR fapolicyd-cli (8),
.BR fapolicyd.conf (5),
.BR fapolicyd.rules (5),
and
.BR fapolicyd.trust (5).
