.TH "FAPOLICYD-CLI" "8" "March 2026" "Red Hat" "System Administration Utilities"
.SH NAME
fapolicyd-cli \- Fapolicyd CLI Tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBfapolicyd-cli\fP [\fIoptions\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The fapolicyd command line utility performs maintenance and troubleshooting tasks for fapolicyd. It can ask the daemon to reload state, inspect the trust database, validate configuration, test filter decisions, and manage administrator-defined trust entries. Normally the daemon learns about package changes through integration such as the dnf plugin, but manual package installation or direct edits to trust files still require explicit administrator action.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Prints a list of command line options.
.TP
.B \-\-check-config
Opens fapolicyd.conf and parses it to see if there are any syntax errors in the file.
.TP
.B \-\-check-path
Check the PATH environmental variable against the trustdb to look for file not in the trustdb which could cause problems at run time.
.TP
.B \-\-check-status
Dump the daemon's internal performance statistics. See
.BR fapolicyd.state (5)
for the report fields. See also the fapolicyd.conf options \fBreport_interval\fP and \fBreset_strategy\fP. This command requests a plain state report and does not ask the daemon to reset runtime metric counters.
.TP
.B \-\-check-trustdb
Check the trustdb against the files on disk to look for mismatches that will cause problems at run time.
.TP
.B \-\-check-watch_fs
Check the mounted file systems against the watch_fs daemon config entry to determine if any file systems need to be added to the configuration.
.TP
.B \-\-check-ignore_mounts[=mount-point]
Inspect the ignore_mounts list or the provided mount point for potentially
executable content. The command verifies that each mount exists, confirms the
presence of the \fBnoexec\fP option, and scans the directory tree for files
matching the \fB%languages\fP macro. Any matches are reported and a summary per
mount is displayed. A non-zero status is returned when suspicious files are
found so automated workflows can gate changes.
.TP
.B \-\-check-rules [path]
Parse the rules file and validate its syntax without loading it into the daemon. If \fIpath\fP is omitted, the command checks the active rules file, using \fI/etc/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.rules\fP when present and \fI/etc/fapolicyd/compiled.rules\fP otherwise. A zero exit status means the file is valid.
.TP
.B \-\-lint
When used with \fB\-\-check-rules\fP, also emit policy-shape warnings for executable or programmatic content that can reach the default-allow path. The option may be placed before or after \fB\-\-check-rules\fP. A warning causes a non-zero exit status.
.TP
.B \-\-reset-metrics
Request the metrics to be reset. Runtime metric counters reset after a report is written when the daemon is configured with \fBreset_strategy=manual\fP. The report contains the counter values being reset. The CLI checks the on-disk \fIfapolicyd.conf\fP before requesting the metrics to be reset. If the on-disk \fBreset_strategy\fP is not \fBmanual\fP, or the setting cannot be verified, the command tells the user and sends a plain \fB\-\-check-status\fP request instead. The daemon's active in-memory setting may differ from the file until configuration is reloaded. The command asks for confirmation before sending the reset request unless \fB-y\fP or \fB--yes\fP is used.
.TP
.B \-y, \-\-yes
Do not prompt before \fB--reset-metrics\fP sends a reset request.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-delete-db
Deletes the trust database. Normally this never needs to be done. But if for some reason the trust database becomes corrupted, then the only method of recovery is to run this command.
.TP
.B \-D, \-\-dump-db
Dumps the trust db contents for inspection. This will print the original trust source, path, file size, and recorded hash of the file as known by the trust source the entry came from. The rpm backend may provide SHA256 or SHA512 digests depending on how the package was built.
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-file  add|delete|update [path]
Manage the file trust database.
.RS
.TP 12
.B add
This command adds the file given by path to the trust database. It gets the size and calculates the required hash (SHA256 by default). If the path is a directory, it will walk the directory tree to the bottom and add every regular file that it finds. By default, the path is appended to the end of the \fBfapolicyd.trust\fP file.
.TP 12
.B delete
This command deletes all entries that match from the trust database. It will try to match multiple entries so that entire directories can be deleted in one command. To ensure that you only match a directory and not a partial name, be sure to end with '/'.
.TP 12
.B update
This command updates the size and hash of any matching paths in the file trust database. If no path is given, then all files are updated. If an argument is passed, then only matching paths get updated. If the intent is to match against a directory, ensure that it ends with '/'.
.TP 12
.B --filter
When used with \fBadd\fP or \fBupdate\fP, evaluate the selected files and directories through the filter configuration (\fIfapolicyd-filter.conf\fP). Paths excluded by the filter are skipped so only allowed entries are added or refreshed.
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-trust-file trust-file-name
Use after \fBfile\fP option. Makes every command of \fBfile\fP option operate on a single trust file named \fBtrust-file-name\fP that is located inside trust.d directory. If a trust file with such a name does not exist inside trust.d directory, it is created.
.TP
.B \-\-test-filter /path/to/file
Evaluate the filter configuration against the given path and emit a rule-by-rule trace ending with "decision include" or "decision exclude". Use this to confirm whether a file would be eligible for inclusion in the trust database.
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-ftype /path/to/file
Prints the mime type of the file given. A full path must be specified. This command is intended to help get the ftype parameter of rules correct by seeing how fapolicyd will classify it. Fapolicyd may differ from the \fBfile\fP command.
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-list
Prints a listing of the fapolicyd rules file with a rule number to aid in troubleshooting or understanding of the debug messages.
.TP
.B \-u, \-\-update
Notifies fapolicyd to perform an update of the trust database.
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-reload-rules
Notifies fapolicyd to perform a reload of the rules.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Enable additional output for commands that support it. At present this affects \fB\-\-check-ignore_mounts\fP by printing each file that does not pass inspection.
.SH RETURN CODES
The following exit status values are used for error reporting and scripting:
.TP
.B 0  Success
Normal completion.
.TP
.B 1  Generic/unspecified failure
Fallback for errors that do not map to a more specific category.
.TP
.B 2  CLI/usage error
Incorrect options or argument counts.
.TP
.B 3  Path/configuration error
Failed \fBrealpath\fP lookups, malformed configuration, or invalid mount overrides.
.TP
.B 4  Database/LMDB error
Trust database operations failed (creation, open, cursor traversal, or deletion).
.TP
.B 5  Rule/filter error
Filter initialization or parsing problems, including \fB%languages\fP handling.
.TP
.B 6  Daemon/IPC error
Communication with the daemon failed (FIFO permissions/shape issues, missing PID, or status report timeouts).
.TP
.B 7  Filesystem/I\-O/permission error
Problems opening, stat'ing, or writing files (including rule files or the trust database on disk).
.TP
.B 8  Internal software/OOM
Allocation failures or other unexpected internal errors.
.TP
.B 9  No\-op/Not\-found/Nothing to do
Operations that completed without making changes, such as attempting to update, delete, or add entries that were not present.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fapolicyd (8),
.BR fapolicyd.rules (5),
.BR fapolicyd.state (5),
.BR fapolicyd.trust (5),
and
.BR fapolicyd.conf (5)

.SH AUTHOR
Zoltan Fridrich
