.TH "FAPOLICYD" "8" "March 2026" "Red Hat" "System Administration Utilities"
.SH NAME
fapolicyd \- File Access Policy Daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fapolicyd
.RI [ --debug | --debug-deny ]
.RI [ --permissive ]
.RI [ --no-details ]
.RI [ --mounts=PATH ]
.RI [ --version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBfapolicyd\fP is a userspace daemon that determines access rights to files based on a trust database and file or process attributes. It can be used to either blacklist or whitelist file access and execution.

Configuring \fBfapolicyd\fP is done with the files in the \fI/etc/fapolicyd/\fP directory. There are three files:
.B compiled.rules
,
.B fapolicyd.conf
, and
.B fapolicyd.trust.
The first one contains the access policy, the second determines the daemon's configuration, and the last allows admin defined trusted files.

The default rules will generate audit events whenever there is a denial. NOTE:
you must have at least 1 audit rule loaded for the audit system to create the full FANOTIFY event. It doesn't matter which rule is loaded. To see if you have any denials, you can run the following command:

.RS
.TP 2
.B ausearch \-\-start today \-m fanotify \-i
.RE

or instead of \-i, you can add \-\-format text to get an easier to read audit event.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Run the daemon in the foreground and write event information to stderr so
policy decisions can be observed.
.TP
.B \-\-debug\-deny
Run the daemon in the foreground and write only deny decisions to stderr.
.TP
.B \-\-permissive
Allow file access even when policy would deny it. This is useful when
validating rules before enforcing them.
.TP
.B \-\-mounts=PATH
In debug mode only, read mount information from the regular file at
.I PATH
instead of
.I /proc/mounts.
The file must use the same format as
.IR /proc/mounts .
This is useful when reproducing mount-related issues with a captured or
filtered mount list.
.TP
.B \-\-no-details
Suppress process and file names in the shutdown usage report while keeping
the aggregate statistics.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM
causes fapolicyd to discontinue processing events, write it's performance report, and exit.

.TP
.B SIGHUP
causes fapolicyd to reload the trust database.

.TP
.B SIGUSR1
causes fapolicyd to dump the requested report to
.IR /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.state
or
.IR /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.metrics .
See
.BR fapolicyd.state (5)
and
.BR fapolicyd.metrics (5).
When
.B reset_strategy=manual
is configured, a SIGUSR1 report that carries reset intent (only possible programmatically) also resets runtime metric counters after the report is written. Plain SIGUSR1 reports do not reset counters.
SIGUSR1 can also carry timing start and stop intents. Those intents are honored
only for privileged senders when
.B timing_collection=manual
is active; stopped timing runs are written to
.IR /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.timing .

.SH NOTES
Whatever you do, DO NOT TRY TO ATTACH WITH PTRACE. Ptrace attachment sends a SIGSTOP which cannot be blocked. Since your whole system depends on fapolicyd approving access to glibc and various critical libraries, that will not happen until SIGCONT is sent. The system can deadlock if the continue signal is not sent.

To get audit events, you must have auditing enabled and at least one systemcall rule loaded. Otherwise you will not get any events.

If the rpmdb is set as a trust source, you should minimize the number of 32 bit packages on the system. In such cases, there may be a 32 bit and 64 file with the same pathname. Obviously only one can exist on the disk. So, this will always cause database miscompares and cause a delay in the daemon being operational.

The
.B compiled.rules
file is the resulting merge of component rules in /etc/fapolicyd/rules.d/ See
the
.B fagenrules
man page for more information.

If you are running in the debug mode and wish to compare rule numbers reported in the output with which rule is actually triggering, you can see the rules with the corresponding number by running the following command:

.nf
.B fapolicyd-cli \-\-list
.fi

.SH FILES
.B /etc/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.conf
- daemon configuration
.P
.B /etc/fapolicyd/compiled.rules
- access control rules
.P
.B /etc/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.trust
- admin defined trusted files
.P
.B /var/log/fapolicyd-access.log
- information about what was being accessed.
.P
.B /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.state
- daemon state report. See
.BR fapolicyd.state (5).
.P
.B /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.metrics
- runtime metrics report. See
.BR fapolicyd.metrics (5).
.P
.B /run/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.timing
- manual decision timing report. See
.BR fapolicyd.timing (5).

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fapolicyd-cli (8),
.BR fapolicyd.rules (5),
.BR fapolicyd.state (5),
.BR fapolicyd.metrics (5),
.BR fapolicyd.timing (5),
.BR fapolicyd.trust (5),
.BR fapolicyd-filter.conf (5),
.BR fagenrules (8),
and
.BR fapolicyd.conf (5)

.SH AUTHOR
Steve Grubb
